---
layout: page
title: Papers WS 2019
sidebar_link: true
---

<p class="message">

    The PDFs of the papers can be downloaded by following this
    <a href="https://www.dropbox.com/sh/aucv0cgszs5lb5k/AAADRlvR1kdSZf4FuY-x2JPUa?dl=0">link</a>

    (password protected).

</p>

You should have received the password by mail (if not, contact Rainer).

We have chosen to discuss papers under the broad umbrella of "**Applications and implications of climatically forced cryospheric change**". 

This should be a rich vein that sustains us the whole semester - it includes things like:
- what the changing cryosphere can tell us about climate/pollution/earth system interactions
- how changing cryosphere impacts water/society/sea level/ecosystems ...
- both new opportunities and potential risks/hazards of a changing cryopshere
- all the different kinds of cryopsheric systems (good IPCC description of components of the cryopshere <a href="https://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/ch4s4-1.html">here</a>)

### Upcoming paper

On **22nd January** we will discuss as a team:

Levermann, A., Bamber, J., Drijfhout, S., Ganopolski, A., Haeberli, W., Harris, N. R. P., Huss, M., Krüger, K., Lenton, T. M., Lindsay, R., Notz, D., Wadhams, P. and Weber, S.: Potential climatic transitions with profound impact on Europe, Clim. Change, 845–878, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0126-5, 2011. 

There are 6 'tipping elements'
    - Ice sheets
    - Atlantic thermohaline circulation
    - Arctic sea ice
    - Alpine glaciers
    - Northern hemisphere stratospheric ozone
We can pick an element each to present, with discussion led by an appointed chairperson, and we can discuss the impacts and applications of the tipping points being crossed.

### Looking further ahead ....

On **29th January** we will discuss as a team:

The IPCC Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5 °C - https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
We will read the statments of the technical summary and each pick one point of interest to follow up on from the main report and other sources.

Although we will not in the end look at the ISSW abstracts relevent to our topic, I have nevertheless added a few to our Dropbox folder. 

### Suggested papers

Barbante, C., Schwikowski, M., Döring, T., Gäggeler, H. W., Schotterer, U., Tobler, L., Van De Velde, K., Ferrari, C., Cozzi, G., Turetta, A., Rosman, K., Bolshov, M., Capodaglio, G., Cescon, P. and Boutron, C.: Historical record of European emissions of heavy metals to the atmosphere since the 1650s from alpine snow/ice cores drilled near Monte Rosa, Environ. Sci. Technol., 38(15), 4085–4090, doi:10.1021/es049759r, 2004. (Zora)

Gilbert, A., Leinss, S., Kargel, J., Kääb, A., Yao, T., Gascoin, S., Leonard, G., Berthier, E. and Karki, A.: Mechanisms leading to the 2016 giant twin glacier collapses , Aru range , Tibet, , (March), 1–26, 2018. (Lindsey)

Harrison, S., Jeffrey, S. ., Christian, H., John, R., Dan, D. H., Richard, A. ., Adam, E., Neil, G., Umesh, H. K., Jan, K., Liam, R., Yvonne, S., Andy, W., Dhananjay, R. and Vít, V.: Climate change and the global pattern of moraine-dammed glacial lake outburst floods, Cryosph., 1195–1209, doi:10.5194/tc-12-1195-2018, 2018. (Lindsey)

Marzeion, B., Jarosch, A. H. and Hofer, M.: Past and future sea-level change from the surface mass balance of glaciers, Cryosph., 6(6), 1295–1322, doi:10.5194/tc-6-1295-2012, 2012. (Martin)

Marzeion, B., Kaser, G., Maussion, F. and Champollion, N.: Limited influence of climate change mitigation on short-term glacier mass loss, Nat. Clim. Chang., 8(April), 1–4, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0093-1, 2018. (Lindsey)

Lind, S., Ingvaldsen, R. B. and Furevik, T.: Arctic warming hotspot in the northern Barents Sea linked to declining sea-ice import, Nat. Clim. Chang., 8(7), 634–639, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0205-y, 2018. (Kristin)

Lutz, A. F., Immerzeel, W. W., Shrestha, A. B. and Bierkens, M. F. P.: Consistent increase in High Asia’s runoff due to increasing glacier melt and precipitation, Nat. Clim. Chang., 4(7), 587–592, doi:10.1038/nclimate2237, 2014. (Lutz)

Marty, C., Schlögl, S., Bavay, M. and Lehning, M.: How much can we save? Impact of different emission scenarios on future snow cover in the Alps, Cryosphere, 11(1), 517–529, doi:10.5194/tc-11-517-2017, 2017. (Lindsey)

McGuire, A. D., Lawrence, D. M., Koven, C., Clein, J. S., Burke, E., Chen, G., Jafarov, E., MacDougall, A. H., Marchenko, S., Nicolsky, D., Peng, S., Rinke, A., Ciais, P., Gouttevin, I., Hayes, D. J., Ji, D., Krinner, G., Moore, J. C., Romanovsky, V., Schädel, C., Schaefer, K., Schuur, E. A. G. and Zhuang, Q.: Dependence of the evolution of carbon dynamics in the northern permafrost region on the trajectory of climate change, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 201719903, doi:10.1073/pnas.1719903115, 2018.(Tiago)

Melia, N., Haines, K. and Hawkins, E.: Sea ice decline and 21st century trans-Arctic shipping routes, Geophys. Res. Lett., 43(18), 9720–9728, doi:10.1002/2016GL069315, 2016. (Lindsey)

Mernild, S. H., Lipscomb, W. H., Bahr, D. B., Radić, V. and Zemp, M.: Global glacier changes: A revised assessment of committed mass losses and sampling uncertainties, Cryosphere, 7(5), 1565–1577, doi:10.5194/tc-7-1565-2013, 2013. (Lindsey)

Schuur, E. A. G., McGuire, A. D., Schädel, C., Grosse, G., Harden, J. W., Hayes, D. J., Hugelius, G., Koven, C. D., Kuhry, P., Lawrence, D. M., Natali, S. M., Olefeldt, D., Romanovsky, V. E., Schaefer, K., Turetsky, M. R., Treat, C. C. and Vonk, J. E.: Climate change and the permafrost carbon feedback, Nature, 520(7546), 171–179, doi:10.1038/nature14338, 2015. (Lindsey)

Screen, J. A., Deser, C., Simmonds, I. and Tomas, R.: Atmospheric impacts of Arctic sea-ice loss, 1979-2009: Separating forced change from atmospheric internal variability, Clim. Dyn., 43(1–2), 333–344, doi:10.1007/s00382-013-1830-9, 2014. (Lindsey)

### Past papers

**16th October** Zora 

Bogdal, C., Nikolic, D., Lüthi, M. P., Schenker, U., Scheringer, M. and Hungerbühler, K.: Release of legacy pollutants from melting glaciers: Model evidence and conceptual understanding, Environ. Sci. Technol., 44(11), 4063–4069, doi:10.1021/es903007h, 2010.

**23rd October** Tiago 

McGuire, A. D., Lawrence, D. M., Koven, C., Clein, J. S., Burke, E., Chen, G., Jafarov, E., MacDougall, A. H., Marchenko, S., Nicolsky, D., Peng, S., Rinke, A., Ciais, P., Gouttevin, I., Hayes, D. J., Ji, D., Krinner, G., Moore, J. C., Romanovsky, V., Schädel, C., Schaefer, K., Schuur, E. A. G. and Zhuang, Q.: Dependence of the evolution of carbon dynamics in the northern permafrost region on the trajectory of climate change, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 201719903, doi:10.1073/pnas.1719903115, 2018.

**30th October** 
MSc defensio of Edoardo Raparelli:Snow metamorphism and densification: Comparison of measured, parametrised and modelled data. 

**6th November** Lily 

Oerlemans, J., Haag, M. and Keller, F.: Slowing down the retreat of the Morteratsch glacier, Switzerland, by artificially produced summer snow: a feasibility study, Clim. Change, 145(1–2), 189–203, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2102-1, 2017.

**13th November** David

Ragettli, S., Immerzeel, W. W. and Pellicciotti, F.: Contrasting climate change impact on river flows from high-altitude catchments in the Himalayan and Andes Mountains, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 113(33), 9222–9227, doi:10.1073/pnas.1606526113, 2016.

**27th November** Andrea

Emmer, A., Merkl, S. and Mergili, M.: Spatiotemporal patterns of high-mountain lakes and related hazards in western Austria, Geomorphology, 246, 602–616, doi:10.1016/j.geomorph.2015.06.032, 2015.

**4th December** Martin

Henderson, G. R., Peings, Y., Furtado, J. C. and Kushner, P. J.: Snow–atmosphere coupling in the Northern Hemisphere, Nat. Clim. Chang., 8(November), 1, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0295-6, 2018.

**11th December** Andrea

O’Neel, S., Hood, E., Bidlack, A. L., Fleming, S. W., Arimitsu, M. L., Arendt, A., Burgess, E., Sergeant, C. J., Beaudreau, A. H., Timm, K., Hayward, G. D., Reynolds, J. H. and Pyare, S.: Icefield-to-ocean linkages across the northern pacific coastal temperate rainforest ecosystem, Bioscience, 65(5), 499–512, doi:10.1093/biosci/biv027, 2015.

**8th January** Michael

Kääb, A., Leinss, S., Gilbert, A., Bühler, Y., Gascoin, S., Evans, S. G., Bartelt, P., Berthier, E., Brun, F., Chao, W. A., Farinotti, D., Gimbert, F., Guo, W., Huggel, C., Kargel, J. S., Leonard, G. J., Tian, L., Treichler, D. and Yao, T.: Massive collapse of two glaciers in western Tibet in 2016 after surge-like instability, Nat. Geosci., 11(2), 114–120, doi:10.1038/s41561-017-0039-7, 2018.

**15th January** Alexander

Parkes, D. and Marzeion, B.: Twentieth-century contribution to sea-level rise from uncharted glaciers, Nature, 563(7732), 551–554, doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0687-9, 2018.
