---
layout: page
title: Papers WS 2017
sidebar_link: true
---

<p class="message">

    The PDFs of the papers can be downloaded by followink this
    <a href="https://www.dropbox.com/sh/aucv0cgszs5lb5k/AAADRlvR1kdSZf4FuY-x2JPUa?dl=0">link</a>

    (password protected).

</p>

You should have received the password by mail (if not, contact us).


### Upcoming paper

Next week (31.10.2017) **Sarah** will present:

- Wang, X.P., Yao, T.D., Wang, P.L., Yang, W and Tian, L.D. (2008) The recent deposition 
  of persistent organic pollutants and mercury to the Dasuopu glacier, Mt. Xixiabangma, 
  Central Himalayas, Sci. Total Environ., 394(1), 134–143. 

Next up ...

**Philipp** - TBA
**Mattia** - Pagli et al., 2008

### Suggested papers

- Barbante, C., Schwikowski, M., Döring, T., Gäggeler, H. W., Schotterer, U., 
  Tobler, L., Van De Velde, K., Ferrari, C., Cozzi, G., Turetta, A., Rosman, K., Bolshov, M., 
  Capodaglio, G., Cescon, P. and Boutron, C. (2004) Historical record of European emissions 
  of heavy metals to the atmosphere since the 1650s from alpine snow/ice cores drilled near 
  Monte Rosa, Environ. Sci. Technol., 38(15), 4085–4090. (Sarah)

- Bogdal, C., Schmid, P., Zennegg, M., Anselmetti, F. S., Scheringer, M. and Hungerbühler, K.
  (2009) Blast from the past: Melting glaciers as a relevant source for persistent organic pollutants, 
  Environ. Sci. Technol., 43(21), 8173–8177. (Sarah)
  
- Chiang, J. C. H., Lee, S. Y., Putnam, A. E. and Wang, X. (2014) South Pacific Split Jet, 
  ITCZ shifts, and atmospheric North-South linkages during abrupt climate changes of the 
  last glacial period, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 406, 233–246, doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2014.09.012 (Lindsey)
  
- Forsythe, N., Fowler, H. J., Li, X.-F., Blenkinsop, S., & Pritchard, D. (2017) 
  Karakoram temperature and glacial melt driven by regional atmospheric circulation 
  variability. Nature Climate Change, 7(August). https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3361
  (Georg)

- Hoinkes, H. C. (1968) Glacier variation and weather.
  Journal of Glaciology, 7(49), 3–19. (Fabien)
  
- Howat, I. M., Tulaczyk, S., Rhodes, P., Israel, K. and Snyder, M. (2007) A precipitation-dominated, 
  mid-latitude glacier system: Mount Shasta, California, Climate Dynamics, 28(1), 85–98, 
  doi:10.1007/s00382-006-0178-9 (Lindsey)

- Kerschner, H. (2000) Synoptic climatology of Eastern Alpine glacier
  behavior, 1966-1990. 26th International Conference on Alpine Meteorology,
  11-15 September 2000, (dd), 1–12. (Georg)
  
- Kraaijenbrink, P. D. A., Bierkens, M. F. P., Lutz, A. F. and Immerzeel, W. W. (2017)
  Impact of a global temperature rise of 1.5 degrees Celsius on Asia’s glaciers, Nature, 
  549(7671), 257–260,doi:10.1038/nature23878. (Lindsey)

- Mernild, S. H., Lipscomb, W. H., Bahr, D. B., Radić, V. and Zemp, M. (2013) Global
  glacier changes: A revised assessment of committed mass losses and sampling
  uncertainties, Cryosphere, 7(5), 1565–1577, doi:10.5194/tc-7-1565-2013 (Georg)
  
- Pagli, C. and Sigmundsson, F. (2008) Will present day glacier retreat increase 
  volcanic activity? Stress induced by recent glacier retreat and its effect on 
  magmatism at the Vatnajökull ice cap, Iceland, Geophys. Res. Lett., 35(9), 3–7 (Mattia)
  
- Pautet, P. D., Taylor, M. J., Fritts, D. C., Bossert, K., Williams, B. P., Broutman, 
  D., Ma, J., Eckermann, S. D. and Doyle, J. D.(2016) Large-amplitudemesospheric response to 
  an orographic wave generated over the Southern Ocean Auckland Islands (50.7°S) during 
  the DEEPWAVE project, J. Geophys. Res. Atmos., 120(3), 1–19. (Phadtaya)
  
- Roe, G.H., and Baker, M.B. (2007). Why is climate sensitivity so
  unpredictable?. Science 318.5850, 629-632. (Florian)

- Roe, G. H. (2010). Knowability and no ability in climate projections. An
  EPA/DOE workshop on Improving the Assessment and Valuation of Climate
  Change Impacts for Policy and Regulatory Analysis, Washington DC. 2010. (Florian)
  
- Roe, G. H., and Armour  K. C. (2011) How sensitive is climate sensitivity?
  Geophysical Research Letters, 38, L14708, doi:10.1029/2011GL047913. (Florian)

- Roe, G. H., Feldl, N., Armour, K. C., Hwang, Y.-T. & Frierson, D. M. W. (2015) 
  The remote impacts of climate feedbacks on regional climate predictability. 
  Nature Geoscience, 8(2), 135–139. (Fabien)
  
- Schneider, T., Bischoff, T. and Haug, G. H. (2014) Migrations and dynamics of the 
  intertropical convergence zone, Nature, 513(7516), 45–53. (Phadtaya)

- Themeßl, M. J., Gobiet, A., & Heinrich, G. (2011) Empirical-statistical
  downscaling and error correction of regional climate models and its impact
  on the climate change signal. Climatic Change, 112(2), 449–468. (Fabien)

### Past papers

**Tue 10.10.2017 (Lindsey)**

- Machguth, H., MacFerrin, M., van As, D., Box, J. E., Charalampidis, C., Colgan, W., 
  Fausto, R. S., Meijer, H. A. J., Mosley-Thompson, E. and van de Wal, R. S. W. (2016) 
  Greenland meltwater storage in firn limited by near-surface ice formation, 
  Nat. Clim. Chang., 6(4), 390–393, doi:10.1038/nclimate2899
  
**Tue 17.10.2017 (Florian)**

- Armour, K.C., and Roe, G.H. (2011) Climate commitment in an uncertain world. 
  Geophysical Research Letters, 38, L01707, doi:10.1029/2010GL045850. (2011). 
  
**Tue 24.10.2017 (Thomas)**

- Burke, E. E., & Roe, G. H. (2014) The absence of memory in the climatic
  forcing of glaciers. Climate Dynamics, 42(5-6), 1335–1346.
