---
layout: page
title: Papers WS 2018
sidebar_link: true
---

<p class="message">

    The PDFs of the papers can be downloaded by following this
    <a href="https://www.dropbox.com/sh/aucv0cgszs5lb5k/AAADRlvR1kdSZf4FuY-x2JPUa?dl=0">link</a>

    (password protected).

</p>

You should have received the password by mail (if not, contact Lindsey).

We have chosen to discuss papers under the broad umbrella of "**Applications and implications of climatically forced cryospheric change**". 

This should be a rich vein that sustains us the whole semester - it includes things like:
- what the changing cryopshere can tell us about climate/pollution/earth system interactions
- how changing cryosphere impacts water/society/sea level/ecosystems ...
- both new opportunities and potential risks/hazards of a changing cryopshere
- all the different kinds of cryopsheric systems (good IPCC description of components of the cryopshere <a href="https://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/ch4s4-1.html">here</a>)

### Upcoming paper

On **13th November** davis will present:

Ragettli, S., Immerzeel, W. W. and Pellicciotti, F.: Contrasting climate change impact on river flows from high-altitude catchments in the Himalayan and Andes Mountains, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 113(33), 9222–9227, doi:10.1073/pnas.1606526113, 2016. 

### Looking further ahead ....

On **20th November** Andrea will present:

Emmer, A., Merkl, S. and Mergili, M.: Spatiotemporal patterns of high-mountain lakes and related hazards in western Austria, Geomorphology, 246, 602–616, doi:10.1016/j.geomorph.2015.06.032, 2015.

Please let me know if any of you have suggestions of extended abstracts of interest to or theme from the recent ISSW conference. The abstracts can be found in the <a href="http://arc.lib.montana.edu/snow-science/search.php?workshop=%22International+Snow+Science+Workshop+Proceedings+2018%22">ISSW 2018 Proceedings</a>. I've started adding a few ones of interest to the Dropbox folder.

### Suggested papers

Barbante, C., Schwikowski, M., Döring, T., Gäggeler, H. W., Schotterer, U., Tobler, L., Van De Velde, K., Ferrari, C., Cozzi, G., Turetta, A., Rosman, K., Bolshov, M., Capodaglio, G., Cescon, P. and Boutron, C.: Historical record of European emissions of heavy metals to the atmosphere since the 1650s from alpine snow/ice cores drilled near Monte Rosa, Environ. Sci. Technol., 38(15), 4085–4090, doi:10.1021/es049759r, 2004. (Zora)

Gilbert, A., Leinss, S., Kargel, J., Kääb, A., Yao, T., Gascoin, S., Leonard, G., Berthier, E. and Karki, A.: Mechanisms leading to the 2016 giant twin glacier collapses , Aru range , Tibet, , (March), 1–26, 2018. (Lindsey)

Harrison, S., Jeffrey, S. ., Christian, H., John, R., Dan, D. H., Richard, A. ., Adam, E., Neil, G., Umesh, H. K., Jan, K., Liam, R., Yvonne, S., Andy, W., Dhananjay, R. and Vít, V.: Climate change and the global pattern of moraine-dammed glacial lake outburst floods, Cryosph., 1195–1209, doi:10.5194/tc-12-1195-2018, 2018. (Lindsey)

Kääb, A., Leinss, S., Gilbert, A., Bühler, Y., Gascoin, S., Evans, S. G., Bartelt, P., Berthier, E., Brun, F., Chao, W. A., Farinotti, D., Gimbert, F., Guo, W., Huggel, C., Kargel, J. S., Leonard, G. J., Tian, L., Treichler, D. and Yao, T.: Massive collapse of two glaciers in western Tibet in 2016 after surge-like instability, Nat. Geosci., 11(2), 114–120, doi:10.1038/s41561-017-0039-7, 2018. (Lindsey)

Levermann, A., Bamber, J., Drijfhout, S., Ganopolski, A., Haeberli, W., Harris, N. R. P., Huss, M., Krüger, K., Lenton, T. M., Lindsay, R., Notz, D., Wadhams, P. and Weber, S.: Potential climatic transitions with profound impact on Europe, Clim. Change, 845–878, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0126-5, 2011. (Levermann)

Lind, S., Ingvaldsen, R. B. and Furevik, T.: Arctic warming hotspot in the northern Barents Sea linked to declining sea-ice import, Nat. Clim. Chang., 8(7), 634–639, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0205-y, 2018. (Kristin)

Lutz, A. F., Immerzeel, W. W., Shrestha, A. B. and Bierkens, M. F. P.: Consistent increase in High Asia’s runoff due to increasing glacier melt and precipitation, Nat. Clim. Chang., 4(7), 587–592, doi:10.1038/nclimate2237, 2014. (Lutz)

Marty, C., Schlögl, S., Bavay, M. and Lehning, M.: How much can we save? Impact of different emission scenarios on future snow cover in the Alps, Cryosphere, 11(1), 517–529, doi:10.5194/tc-11-517-2017, 2017. (Lindsey)

McGuire, A. D., Lawrence, D. M., Koven, C., Clein, J. S., Burke, E., Chen, G., Jafarov, E., MacDougall, A. H., Marchenko, S., Nicolsky, D., Peng, S., Rinke, A., Ciais, P., Gouttevin, I., Hayes, D. J., Ji, D., Krinner, G., Moore, J. C., Romanovsky, V., Schädel, C., Schaefer, K., Schuur, E. A. G. and Zhuang, Q.: Dependence of the evolution of carbon dynamics in the northern permafrost region on the trajectory of climate change, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 201719903, doi:10.1073/pnas.1719903115, 2018.(Tiago)

Melia, N., Haines, K. and Hawkins, E.: Sea ice decline and 21st century trans-Arctic shipping routes, Geophys. Res. Lett., 43(18), 9720–9728, doi:10.1002/2016GL069315, 2016. (Lindsey)

Mernild, S. H., Lipscomb, W. H., Bahr, D. B., Radić, V. and Zemp, M.: Global glacier changes: A revised assessment of committed mass losses and sampling uncertainties, Cryosphere, 7(5), 1565–1577, doi:10.5194/tc-7-1565-2013, 2013. (Lindsey)

O’Neel, S., Hood, E., Bidlack, A. L., Fleming, S. W., Arimitsu, M. L., Arendt, A., Burgess, E., Sergeant, C. J., Beaudreau, A. H., Timm, K., Hayward, G. D., Reynolds, J. H. and Pyare, S.: Icefield-to-ocean linkages across the northern pacific coastal temperate rainforest ecosystem, Bioscience, 65(5), 499–512, doi:10.1093/biosci/biv027, 2015. (Lindsey)

Schuur, E. A. G., McGuire, A. D., Schädel, C., Grosse, G., Harden, J. W., Hayes, D. J., Hugelius, G., Koven, C. D., Kuhry, P., Lawrence, D. M., Natali, S. M., Olefeldt, D., Romanovsky, V. E., Schaefer, K., Turetsky, M. R., Treat, C. C. and Vonk, J. E.: Climate change and the permafrost carbon feedback, Nature, 520(7546), 171–179, doi:10.1038/nature14338, 2015. (Lindsey)

Screen, J. A., Deser, C., Simmonds, I. and Tomas, R.: Atmospheric impacts of Arctic sea-ice loss, 1979-2009: Separating forced change from atmospheric internal variability, Clim. Dyn., 43(1–2), 333–344, doi:10.1007/s00382-013-1830-9, 2014. (Lindsey)

### Past papers

**16th October** Zora 

Bogdal, C., Nikolic, D., Lüthi, M. P., Schenker, U., Scheringer, M. and Hungerbühler, K.: Release of legacy pollutants from melting glaciers: Model evidence and conceptual understanding, Environ. Sci. Technol., 44(11), 4063–4069, doi:10.1021/es903007h, 2010.

**23rd October** Tiago 

McGuire, A. D., Lawrence, D. M., Koven, C., Clein, J. S., Burke, E., Chen, G., Jafarov, E., MacDougall, A. H., Marchenko, S., Nicolsky, D., Peng, S., Rinke, A., Ciais, P., Gouttevin, I., Hayes, D. J., Ji, D., Krinner, G., Moore, J. C., Romanovsky, V., Schädel, C., Schaefer, K., Schuur, E. A. G. and Zhuang, Q.: Dependence of the evolution of carbon dynamics in the northern permafrost region on the trajectory of climate change, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 201719903, doi:10.1073/pnas.1719903115, 2018.

**30th October** 
MSc defensio of Edoardo Raparelli:Snow metamorphism and densification: Comparison of measured, parametrised and modelled data. 

**6th November** Lily 

Oerlemans, J., Haag, M. and Keller, F.: Slowing down the retreat of the Morteratsch glacier, Switzerland, by artificially produced summer snow: a feasibility study, Clim. Change, 145(1–2), 189–203, doi:10.1007/s10584-017-2102-1, 2017.


